-----------------------------
title: Using CUDA with GCC 4.7+
tags: cuda gcc gpu workingset
-----------------------------


As many of you who have worked with CUDA are already aware, NVIDIA recently
released [CUDA 5](
https://developer.nvidia.com/content/cuda-5-performance-report-now-available
"CUDA 5 Performance Report Now Available | NVIDIA Developer Zone") for production.

While it introduces a lot of great new features to improve all of our lives, it
still doesn't support the 4.7 series of GCC. This is terribly annoying. Building
a separate GCC is not trivial and setting up the proper environment to use it
conditionally with `nvcc` is a chore. Worst of all, it prevents us from taking
advantage of the great things C11 and C++11 have to offer, even in pure host
code.

Fear not, however, because those of us with nerves of steel can press onward,
NVIDIA be damned.

Step one is to ignore your distributions CUDA package because it's probably
going to have this GCC < 4.7 dependency baked into it.

Instead, [download the toolkit
yourself](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads "CUDA Downloads | NVIDIA
Developer Zone") and run the installer with the `--override` switch to prevent
it from getting upset. I installed mine to `/opt/cuda-5.0/`, but you can of
course put it anywhere you like.

Once it's installed, we're still unable to compile anything because of (over
protective) sanity checks in `/opt/cuda-5.0/include/host_config.h`:

```{.c .numberLines startFrom="78"}
#if defined(__GNUC__)

#if __GNUC__ > 4 || (__GNUC__ == 4 && __GNUC_MINOR__ > 6)

#error -- unsupported GNU version! gcc 4.7 and up are not supported!

#endif /* __GNUC__> 4 || (__GNUC__ == 4 && __GNUC_MINOR__ > 6) */

#endif /* __GNUC__ */
```

Go ahead and comment out that pesky `#error` and we're almost ready.

Apparently GCC 4.7 introduced some changes with respect to some macros
concerning atomic operations. We want to revert them if necessary so that `nvcc`
doesn't get confused and burst into flames. This header can be included in any
CUDA file. It will only `#undef` the troublesome macros if compiled with GCC > 4.6.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/4665669.js"></script>

That's it! No problems so far. I can't say I'd recommend this for your trading
firm's server farm, but for development work it seems to get the job done.

