---
title: Rio - Radio without Ads
tags: Hack Python Shoutcast
---

# Rio - Radio Without Ads

I hate radio ads. I *hate* them. They are just totally unacceptable. It's as
much the radio stations fault as it is the advertiser, but I just can't do it.
You're listening to Sade, then Marvin Gaye, then suddenly laser noises cut in
and some guy shouts at the top of his lungs about car insurance. Honestly, I
don't understand how anyone can handle it.

Being programmers, though, we do not have to settle for this! Enter
`rio`. [Rio][rio] is a server that rebroadcasts radio streams and switches away
from a stream if commercials are detected.

It's currently a very simplistic design that relies on the Shoutcast protocol,
but I've been using it for months now and would label it a smashing success.

## Shoutcast

Before I explain how it works, some background is needed.

In the 90's, WinAmp (remember that?) needed a way to include metadata in MP3
streams for online radio. MP3 files in general already had support for this via
tags such as ID3, but this didn't help with streaming, because there weren't
multiple "files" being played. A listener typically streamed a single, long
blob of MP3 data with many songs in it. So how can we get metadata to the
listener without forcing them to reload the stream after every song change?

WinAmp's answer was to inject the metadata straight into the binary MP3 stream.
The MP3 data isn't altered at all and is still valid, but *additional* data is
injected into it at regular intervals. This data then contains the various
metadata fields for displaying to the user. The catch is that your client must
be aware of this extra data or your audio will sound corrupt as it tries to
"play" the song description text. In practice this isn't really an issue,
though. Because most servers only produce `ICYINFO` enhanced streams if you
request the stream with a specific header, which only compatible clients will
do. The server responds with the stream, but also its own headers indicating
the number of bytes of real data between each metadata payload.

## Finding Ads

What Rio does is as simple as possible. Check the ICYINFO for a commercial and
if so, jump to a new stream. That sounds easy, but there are actually a few
interesting tricks to get right for it to work.

First of all, obviously it only works on stations that include some kind of
recognizable text in the commercial data. This typically says something
annoying like, "GEICO - SUPER THE BEST!!!!", but if you're lucky, it will be
standardized. At least one family of radio streams I listen to actually
*prefixes* every advertisement description with `"AD - "`, which is just too
good to be true.

Secondly, and much more subtle, is the way to handle that response from the
server I was mentioning. So the server, in its response to the client,
includes a header that tells how frequently it will send metadata. Since it's
part of the headers, it can only be passed once and never updated. However,
it's also not standardized, so any station can use whatever value they like
there, depending on how much overhead they want and how much delay they can
tolerate between the start of the new song and the updating of the artist and
track display in the media player. This requires extra care because means that
when Rio switches stations, it might start getting data with a different
metadata interval. If we just forward this on to the client directly, they will
be out of sync and start hearing scratches and blips in the audio.

The solution is to have Rio extract the metadata and reconstruct the pure MP3
data itself then inject the metadata back into the MP3 stream at the correct
rate. Conceptional this isn't very difficult, but it did take some time to get
right.

Once the system was fundamentally working, it was easy to extend with some
useful new features. For example, it quickly became a pain to continually
update the catalog of Ads' metadata to know when to drop a stream, but if we
consider that no reasonable song will be under 1.5 to 2 minutes, we can *learn*
which titles are associated with ads by just considering playing time. This
turned out to be very successful indeed. You always hear an ad the first time
around, but if it's short enough, we simply save that ad's text and add it to
our collection to avoid. This has really worked surprisingly well. Every Friday
I go through the block list and make sure to clear out any erroneously labeled
ads, although there are typically very few.


If you want to check out the code or try it yourself you can find it on
[GitHub][rio].


[rio]: https://github.com/johntyree/rio
