---
title: inotifytools <3 <3 <3
tags: Hack Linux Sysadmin Tools Build
---

# inotify-tools runs my life

In any good discussion about programming tools, the topic of IDEs will always
come up. It has never, in the history of all mankind, not come up. You may have
heard some neckbeard on Reddit or IRC repeat the mantra that they use Linux or
Unix and "UNIX is my IDE."

### This post is just more of the same.

I don't have a neckbeard, but I do have a neck - and a cool scar on my chin -
so I think I'm well qualified to weigh-in on this.

Personally, I'm an insufferable Vim user. I have an [impressive collection of
plugins][vimrc] to make it do the things I need, but it is still not an IDE. It
turns out, however, that we can do one better!

If your Linux kernel has been configured with `CONFIG_INOTIFY` you can tell the
kernel to watch the filesystem for changes. These changes can be of many
different kinds but we're interested in just a few - closing a file and moving a
file.

The real magic comes from the `inotifywait` client from the `inotify-tools`
package. When you call it, it blocks until one of these specified events
happens. Then it returns.

The end.

In the true UNIX tradition of gluing together lots of tiny programs, we can use
this in a bash function to run arbitrary commands whenever files change.

Here is my magic incantation. First, we define a wrapper function in your
`~/.bashrc` file. Notice there's nothing specific to programming in here at
all. There's mention of the `.git` directory, but only that it should be
ignored, not that's it's required.

```bash
onmodify ()
{
    TARGET=${1:-.};
    shift;
    CMD="$@";
    echo "$TARGET" "$CMD";
    (
    while inotifywait --exclude '.git' -qq -r -e close_write,moved_to,move_self $TARGET; do
        sleep 0.2;
        bash -c "$CMD";
        echo;
    done )
}
```

Then you can use it with
```bash
$ onmodify . "nosetests --rednose --failed --with-id"
```
and it will run your tests every time you modify a file! This works at any
time, with any file or language. You can have multiple going at once. You can
have arbitrarily complex commands in that string, including pipes and `&&`.
Amazing.

Some other fun examples
```bash
$ # Rebuild and sync my blog every time I modify a post.
$ onmodify posts "./site rebuild && ./site deploy"

$ # Play a chime whenever a Dropbox file arrives
$ onmodify  ~/Dropbox "play ~/audio/dingding.mp3"

$ # Regenerate my tags file if I change anything
$ onmodify src "hasktags --ctags src"
```

Long live Linux, the best IDE!

[vimrc]: https://github.com/johntyree/dotfiles/blob/master/vimrc
