---
title: Coding Challenges
tags: Coding Haskell
---

# Coding Challenges


I've been working on the fundamentals of data structures and algorithms lately
and I just want to share a few websites that have been really fun for
practicing.

If you care about this at all, you're probably already familiar with
[TopCoder](http://www.topcoder.com), but I'll be honest. I hate that site. It's
not that the content isn't good, it just isn't fun. Instead I want to talk
about two sites I've really enjoyed so far.

## [HackerRank](http://www.hackerrank.com)

HackerRank is pretty straight forward place, but with an educational spin that
I really like. In general, you are simply solving challenges such that your
code can pass all of the test cases before the allotted time runs out, but many
of the challenges are organized in such a way that you aren't just testing your
knowledge of a topic like dynamic programming or breadth first search, but the
material is actually *teaching* it to you.

The challenges are put together in such a way that new concepts are intuitive
and can be discovered naturally, but culminate in an understanding of a pretty
complicated idea at the end of a series.

It also supports many different languages. I have been working through Haskell
and Python problems. For example, here are two of my solutions to the knapsack
problem in the "dynamic programming" series.
```haskell
-- Haskell
import qualified Data.IntMap.Strict as M
import qualified Data.Vector.Unboxed as V

knap :: Int -> V.Vector Int -> Int
knap k v = fromJust . M.lookup k $ foldl' f M.empty [1..k]
  where
    f m k = V.foldl' (check k) m v

check :: Int -> M.IntMap Int -> Int -> M.IntMap Int
check k m e = newM
  where get k' = fromMaybe 0 (M.lookup k' m)
        current = get k
        best_with = let b = get (k - e) + e
                    in if b <= k then b else 0
        best_without = get (k - 1)
        val = maximum [current, best_with, best_without]
        newM = M.insert k val m
```
```python
#!/usr/bin/env python
def knap(k, v):
    """Return the maximum sum less than or equal to K achievable by taking
    elements of v."""
    d = {0: 0}
    for c in range(1, k + 1):
        d[c] = 0
        for e in v:
            current = d[c]
            best_with = d.get(c - e, 0) + e
            best_with = best_with if best_with <= c else 0
            best_without = d[c - 1]
            d[c] = max(current, best_with, best_without)
    return d.get(k)
```

## [CodeWars](http://www.codewars.com)

CodeWars is much less pedagogical than HackerRank. Instead it somewhat
gamifies the challenges, by treating it one would a martial art in a dojo.
"Honor" is earned by completing challenges, which affects the scoreboard, but
also ups your expertise ranking.

Challenges are divided up by difficulty rather than topic, allowing for easily
finding challenges that suit your level. Additionally, as you solve challenges,
your own ranking, which is on the same scale as the challenge difficulty, will
increase.

For example, if one starts with an `8 kyu` rating and solves three `4 kyu`
challenges, the site might promote you to `4 kyu`. This both lets you know that
you're ready for harder challenges, and lets other easily see the level of
difficulty that you have been able to handle thus far.

What I really like about this site is that the challenges are crowdsourced.
This means that they can get pretty creative, dive deep on theory or some
technical concept, and generally kick ass without seeming formulaic or
arbitrary.

A simple challenge with a low rating might be something like, figuring out
whether a linked list has a loop in it.

```haskell
data Node a = Node a (Node a)

instance Eq a => Eq (Node a) where
  (Node a _) == (Node b _) = a == b

next :: Node a -> Node a
next (Node _ n) = n

loopSize :: Eq a => Node a -> Int
loopSize node = 1 + length loop
  where
    loop = takeWhile (/= head loops) (tail loops)
    loops = dropWhile (uncurry (/=)) pairs
    pairs = zip nodes (skip (tail nodes))
    nodes = iterate next node
    skip (a:_:as) = a : skip as
```

As you solve these easier questions, it starts ramping up pretty quickly. In
fact, `BrnFckr`, my brainfuck compiler, started out as a CodeWars challenge.

If you like to code, you should try these out! My user is `hiptobecubic`.
